Blog post - team working agreements (#590)
artsy/artsy.github.io: _posts/2020-03-30-team-working-agreements.md

---
layout: epic
title: "Team Working Agreements"
date: "2020-03-30"
author: [steve-hicks, adam]
categories: [people, culture, process, team]
css: dialogue
---

Good team culture strives for cohesion. Once organizations get large enough, a tension emerges between the culture
of individual teams and the culture of the larger organization. How do you achieve team cohesion across small teams
_and_ the larger organizations they comprise?

The culture at Artsy is driven by every team member, not mandated or handed down from above. This adds another
level of tension, between individuals and their smaller teams. Team working agreements embrace that tension to
provide a framework for converting tension into healthy culture.

<!-- more -->

Artsy Engineering is part of a larger organization we call PDDE (Product, Design, Data, and Engineering). PDDE is
divided into several product teams, and each team contains at least one representative from product, design, data,
and engineering. Each PDDE team delivers product solutions targeted to a specific product need.

> Until recently, those teams could expect a significant change in team members every quarter, as we encouraged

Reviewer: I feel like something here around how all the changes happened at the same time might be helpful? Up to you!

```suggestion
Until recently, those teams could expect a significant change in team members at the start of every quarter, as we encouraged
```

      brainstorm, it's something our team is living. Hearing our slogan-like habits recited during team meetings
      long after the brainstorm is a testament to the value of the agreement.
    </p>
  </div>
</aside>

### It can lead to better engagement in sprint activities.

One of our teams established in their working agreement that sprint meetings were valuable. This might seem too
obvious to put in a team working agreement, but it portrays clearly to everyone that they should attend all sprint
meetings and be actively engaged.

The same team got a lot out of making slogans for the items in their working agreement. Phrases like "Pair by
default" and "Incremental improvement over consistency" were introduced during the brainstorm. They've since become
mantras for the team to refer to during sprint work and ceremonies. Team values and habits solidify through this
kind of repetition.

### The team working agreement provides on-boarding documentation.

When new members join a team, it takes time for them to adjust. A team working agreement provides an up-to-date
reference on the team's preferred methods of working. The working agreement isn't set in stone, and as the team

> changes it's important to update it...but having it in writing helps new members acclimate quickly.

Reviewer: Minor nitpick: 

```suggestion
changes it's important to update it... but having it in writing helps new members acclimate quickly.
```

busier than expected, didn't have time to write the agreement, and the team's agreement stalled.

Just as personal self-care gets put on the back burner during stressful times, creating a working agreement is easy
to bump down the backlog during intense periods of sprint work. The longer a team drags out the working agreement
process, the more context is lost from the original brainstorm. We recommend not letting your working agreement
linger.

It's also important to revisit the working agreement often. It is a living document, not one-and-done. Review the
agreement as a team occasionally; update the agreement as your team learns how to collaborate better; cultivate the
agreement. If an agreement gets stale, it will become inaccurate, meaningless, and unused.

### What does it even mean to have a team working agreement?

A team working agreement is a neat artifact. The brainstorm process has great value. But there is non-obvious work
involved in turning a team working agreement into the team culture. We have many questions that we aren't sure how
to answer:

- How do you enforce the agreement?

> - **Should** you enforce the agreement?

Reviewer: Again minor, but it feels weird to only have one item bolded. Maybe italics makes more sense?

![Screen Shot 2020-03-30 at 14 31 07](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/498212/77948238-1a95b800-7293-11ea-867e-620f6911099e.png)

```suggestion
- _Should_ you enforce the agreement?
```

      opinion because I'm not sure how the team feels about it. The team working agreement process has definitely
      helped lessen this feeling.
    </p>
    <p>
      There's a [great talk by Katherine Wu named "Ask vs Guess Culture"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FxTXf6qyaGk). 
      "Guess" culture is when you try to guess what a person wants or is thinking; "Ask" culture is when you flat out 
      ask them. Team agreement brainstorms are a really neat way to *ask* your team how they want to work, instead of
      spending many sprints trying to guess.
    </p>
    <p>
      So far, I have seen the most value out of *the actual brainstorm* than the working agreement itself. My teams 
      have learned so much about each others' habits and values.
    </p>
  </div>
  <div class="answer">
    <img src="/images/dialogue/adam.jpg">
    <p class="intro">Adam Iskounen says...</p>
    <p>
      The process has helped confirm that the team shared interest in team dynamics & the process of collaboration 
      across the team. As a new member it's nice to know that information.
    </p>
    <p>

>       It's been great to see teammates in different contexts bring up the team agreement. It wasn't just a one-hour 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      It's been great to see teammates bring up the team agreement in different contexts. It wasn't just a one-hour 
```

The original version reads like we have teammates in different contexts.

      to avoid this. To me, team values were really important for this new team - and I did such a good 
      job of encouraging those types of suggestions that it's pretty much all we ended up with.
    </p>
    <p>
      As a result, our initial working agreement lacked important procedural and tactical definition. We've 
      been adding things like JIRA hygiene and responsibilities of project leaders as they come up, but I would
      not push a working agreement brainstorm so strongly in one direction again.
    </p>
  </div>
</aside>

Remember that the working agreement is a living document. If the team learns that it missed something in the
brainstorm, don't hesitate to update the agreement. Team retros are a great time to make updates.

### Working agreements are hard to define for teams without a well-established identity.

For a team that has a strong and cohesive identity, the agreement is likely to affirm many things the team is
already believing and doing. For a less cohesive team the agreement is harder to pin down. Many opinions will
surface, and they may be in conflict with each other.

> While this is indeed challenging, it is also important to note that teams that lack identity value _greatly_ from

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While this is indeed challenging, it is also important to note that teams that lack identity benefit _greatly_ from
```

I read "identity value" as a compound word instead of reading "value" as a verb, so think that "benefit" would remove that ambiguity.

the team agreement brainstorm. Provided there is
[psychological safety](https://github.com/artsy/README/blob/master/culture/engineering-principles.md#psychological-safety),
this is a really great time for the team to learn about what matters to each other, and move toward establishing an
identity.

### Facilitating the brainstorm can be difficult on a distributed team.

Some of our teams were able to brainstorm with everyone on-site. They were able to rely on post-it notes and

> in-person conversations, and read each other's non-verbal communication. Other teams needed to accommodate remote

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in-person conversations, and read each other's non-verbal communication. Other teams have a mix of on-site and remote
```

I feel like "accommodating" remote members makes it sound like a burden rather than a normal part of our workflow.
